# 01. The Knowledge Book project

This is sort of a diary-blog-whatever about my small project of making a book
about human knowledge. This is going to be a record of the motivation behind
the project and my general thoughts about it. 

There are three reasons why I am thinking about this project:
* Education and bootstrapping research,
* knowledge archivation and preservation,
* I always wanted to have a book like this ;p

Let's start unpacking it but in reverse order! 


## Why this book will be different
I love reading, and I love reading about inventions, science, and so on.  I also
love reading textbooks. But I don't like reading encyclopedias or reference
books too much, because the knowledge in them is presented alphabetically or
topically, rather than in order from simple to complex. But my search for
books about human knowledge "sorted" in the order of increasing complexity
has given very few results. The books I have seen so far either:
* explore human knowledge in one specific context, which requires you to 
learn about contexts in some other ways, or
* choose the scope they want to cover so big they barely say anything specific
or of any practical application, or
* they are incredibly complex and self-referencing, like Wikipedia or Britannica.

Oh well, the human knowledge system is immense, complex and intertwined. But we know
there are textbooks that start from basics and build up from there, that's how
all the school textbooks work. Why not try to do the same thing, but not for just
one subject?

## How much knowledge can be preserved this way, then?
Naturally, the next question to arise is whether it is possible to store any
sort of meaningful information in a format of a single textbook. Britannica, which
perhaps gets fairly close to what I'd want to capture, is over 30 heavy volumes,
after all! The answer to this question, perhaps, can be answered only by an attempt
to build a single-book textbook. I (sort of) tried, and the answer is (sort of) "yes".

My starting point for this experiment was even larger than Britannica because I started thinking about
The Knowledge Book after exploring data archiving solutions.
I wanted to find a way to store the knowledge needed to bootstrap an advanced human society,
for example, a CD3WD, in a compact but easily retrievable way. With a large Mask ROM, 
the data could be extracted by a machine as simple as a mechanical binary counter and a telegraph.
This approach could realistically preserve some 35000 uncompressed A4 pages of text per chip;
a hundred books stored digitally for decades, if not centuries.

A wake-up call was, of course, a comment from a friend. The longevity of MROM chips 
is only calculated, and not tested by time, and the cost of making such a data archive would be exorbitant. 
At the same time, humanity already has cheap and reliable archival solutions in place, 
in the form of low-acid paper that can last for centuries, perhaps more. But because "hard copy" 
requires more space, instead of taking as much space as needed
to preserve as much knowledge as desired (like Britannica does), there is no choice but to
"squeeze"  some of the knowledge in a limited space.

I took 300 pages of A4 paper as a reference (a standard pack of archival paper I saw on sale online) 
and started to plan what I want to put in there. I did some printouts, and I realised that 
even without being too greedy (using generously large fonts), I can have basic textbooks on
Esperanto (more on that later), Maths and Physics on 60 double-sided A4 pages. That leaves
plenty of pages for many other very important topics. The Knowledge Book is "doable".

## But what to put in The Knowledge Book?
"Doable", of course, depends on what you think needs to be in the book. Should it
have a part about arithmetics? What about languages? What assumptions are safe to
make about the reader? How patient are they going to be in deciphering the instructions
from the book?

I think all those questions are very intriguing. Teaching (including teaching a language)
is impossible without finding a shared context between the teacher (or textbook) and the
student. Cultural differences, then, are a great rift between their contexts. It is somewhat
overlooked, it seems, how different "the Western culture" can be from everything else; not
only in its traditions and customs, but also in foods, tools, medicine, and so on.

While I am not aiming to decouple the human knowledge available to anyone with Wikipedia
access from the Western culture itself, I find it important to at least try to take other
perspectives into account. Here is a rather unusual example: Stone Age people
did not know the laws needed to calculate the fuse current rating for a mains plug,
but they did know how to use and make hundreds (perhaps, thousands) of stone and bone tools
on the level unaccessible to the average modern westerner. And I bet a person from such a culture
would find their skills much more relevant to their environment.

Perhaps, aiming for The Knowledge Book to be understood by any Homo Sapiens is far-fetched.
But it sounds fun to at least try! And this, of course, means not only combining
and distilling the textbooks from different cultures together, but experimenting
with different approaches and making things "as simple as possible, but not simpler".

How small and simple starting point we can have, and how far can we go from there?
That's worth researching.

## Wait, Esperanto?
One of the universal challenges for any all-encompassing textbook is the language barrier.
Writing The Knowledge Book in one language would require creating localised versions and
hoping that the target language will be understood by whoever is reading the book. Adding
multiple popular languages in the same book maybe will help to some extent, but there does not
seem to be an option not to add a language textbook section: many concepts that I would 
definitely want to cover in The Knowledge Book are quite hard to express in drawings and
diagrams alone.

Choosing a language for this task is not straightforward. Some of my friends suggested that
I should stick to Basic English with its striking semblance of a very popular real-life language
and its relatively simple grammar. I would rather use a constructed language. Esperanto by any 
means is not free of Western concepts and ideas at its core, but it is relatively simple and
much less rooted in colonialism. Perhaps, there is a better language for my goal, but I have
not found it yet.






