# 02. A brief overview of similar works

As already mentioned, there are multiple books and resources that have similar or
overlapping topics. It is worth going over what they have to offer, as well as recount
their specific weaknesses. You probably will notice that many share common traits.

## Encyclopædia Britannica
THE printed encyclopedia on general knowledge in the English-speaking world.
Too thick and complex to be used as a textbook.

**Pros:** 
* Covers a very wide range of topics, many of those are covered with
significant attention to the details.

**Cons:** 
* Massive: over 32 thousand pages long.
* Complicated: when an article is detailed enough, it requires reading multiple 
related articles to understand what it talks about.
* Conceptual: rarely goes into specifics of practical applications.
* Convoluted: there is no progression from simple to complex. The articles are
expected to be consumed out of order anyways.
* Full of trivia: a large chunk of the Britannica is information about people or locations. 


## The Knowledge: How To Rebuild Our World After An Apocalypse
This book focuses on a scenario where, for some reason, the civilisation is dead
and needs to be rebuilt. Interestingly, the author explores the history of many 
human attempts at building "the total book". 

**Pros:**
* Practical: The author clearly understands that the ability to apply the knowledge 
is very important.
* Well-structured: The book starts with covering the basic necessities, and expands
to very advanced technologies.

**Cons:**
* Superficial: The book doesn't deliver on its promises of being practical by not
providing specific enough details.
* West-focused (perhaps, even US-focused): The book makes many assumptions about
what kind of technology level and knowledge is readily available and easily
obtainable.
* Too advanced: The book would be very hard to understand for the reader without a
general education (high-school level or so).


## The New Complete Book of Self-Sufficiency
This is a book on farming at a small scale, but it includes some information about
biology, construction, food preservation and so on.

**Pros:**
* Optimal level of details about farming: when it comes to farming, this book gives
you enough information and then some extra. It is practial, and the knowledge from 
the book can be used right away.

**Cons:**
* Too farming-focused: things like pottery, spindling, building and metalwork - 
things you need to use for your farm or produce using your farm - receive
inappropriately small amount of pages, and aren't covered well enough to easily
replicate.
* Not safe for vegetarians: the book is full of gore imagery.

## SAS survival guide
A book about surviving in the wilderness until the help comes.

**Pros:**
* Small but powerful: this book is tiny but saves lives.
* Practical: details in the book can be used right away.

**Cons:**
* No singificant ones I can think of. The book is good at what it is.
It just doesn't cover anything beoynd survival needs.

## Thing Explainer: Complicated Stuff in Simple Words
Complex things illustrated and explained using a vocabulary of 1000 words.

**Pros:**
* Educational fun: each page of this book is great to look at.
* Daring: explaining complex things using limited vocabulary is harder than you'd think. 

**Cons:**
* Too hard: every page is fun because it feels like a puzzle. If you don't know what
the book is talking about, and don't have at least an approximate idea how it works,
you're doomed to try, and maybe even fail, to understand what the book is talking about.
"Big tiny thing hitter" is not a very good name for a particle collider.
* Random: the book doesn't follow any structure. It's just random things explained.

## How to Invent Everything: A Survival Guide for the Stranded Time Traveler 
A half-humorous guide on civilization, from writing and counting to computers.

**Pros:**
* Structured: the topic order in the book is from basic technologies to the most
advanced ones.
* Fun to read: it's a good pop-sci, written in simple words with many puns and 
time travel-related jokes.

**Cons:**
* Superficial: quite similarly to "The Knowledge", the book very often doesn't
go into enough details on how to replicate useful things, basic things including. 
How to indentify barley? How to make a wheel or a screw?
* Relatively advanced and western-based: the reader probably needs to have at 
least middle school level of education.
 

