# 03. "The Ark" vs "The Meme"

Speaking of data/knowledge preservation alone, there seems to be at least
two different approaches to it.

## The Ark approach
It seems that Arctic World Archive, The Long Now's Manual for Civilization, Arch 
foundation, and Memory of Mankind projects are all about "pickling" the knowledge 
in such a way that
it can be stored for a long time and retrieved relatively easily if the 
location of the archive is known and can be accessed.

Arks are supposed to be reliable over time. Interestingly enough, some of them are 
expected to last "decades", thought most are expected to survive at least few centuries.
Some of them are made in a way that requires incredibly complex technology to 
decipher, but most have some sort of a "primer" or "Rosetta stone".

Arks are usually small libraries in size. Their biggest downside is probably their
uniqueness: if the knowledge about their location is lost, the Ark is lost, too.
AWA, for example, stores their archive in Spitsbergen, an island that humans didn't
discover until the 17th century, presumably because it was hard to reach and hard to
find.

The Arks are going to be incredibly valuable for the future generations of
archelogists and historians, but I doubt they're going to be very useful otherwise.

## The Meme approach

Here we're using "meme" in a sociological sense, by the way.

A completely different idea of knowledge preservation is to create a set of memes
that can be spread from human to human through generations. We know that some memes
are highly viral and can last for centuries or more; we have The Bible with its 6 billion 
copies. The meme to protect, respect and replicate the book and its teaching is still
going strong. Memory of Mankind uses a similar meme: rite of disc passage to preserve 
the location of their knowledge Ark.

Using memes for knowledge preservation was, apparently, discussed during construction
of long-term nuclear waste storages. It almost makes sense to create The Church Of
Nuclear Waste Site Protectors to keep the sites untouched and humans living around
safe. Of course, no one can guarantee that such a church will survive long enough.

Memes can have another benefit: if they're viral enough, they can spread quickly,
along with artifacts related to them. The Little Prince, being a relatively new
"meme", has already brought 200 million copies of the book to life.

The memes evolve, though, so there's no guarantee that the message will be preserved
correctly. In fact, it's almost a certainty that if the meme is going to be 
successful, there'll be numerous spin-offs.
