# 04. On ethical implications of education

An important yet often overlooked aspect of textbook writing is the value set
and the optics the author used for the textbook. Even when the textbook tries to
be factual and impartial, it still is affected by the values accepted and encouraged
by the author, and we can only hope that the author was aware of those values.

## When biases are obvious

Take, for example, Exercises 8 and 9 from "Russian Language Year 2 Textbook" 1974,
translated to English:

```
Exercise 8. Read:
Michael and his granddad fish often. 
In the evenings, Michael digs out the worms for bait. 
In the morning, he and his granddad go to the Oka River bank. 
The fish are biting well, and Michael is happy.

Exercise 9. Read:
Yuri Gagarin was the first person to fly around Earth in a spaceship. 
He safely returned to Earth. 
We are proud that the first-ever cosmonaut is our Soviet pilot. 
He brought glory to our Motherland in front of the whole world.
```

Thanks to this textbook, seven-year-olds now probably know:
* Fishing is acceptable.
* Worms as bait is acceptable.
* Gathering wild worms as an expendable resource is acceptable.
* When fish is eating the worm and gets its cheek pierced with a hook, it's something to be happy about.
* "Soviet" is "us", "the whole world" is "them".
* Going to space is something that brings glory to your civilization.

Or, for example, here's "Maths. Year 4" 1960.

```
Exercise 31. 
A washing machine can wash 60 kg of clothes in an hour.
A prachka (laundress - there's a picture in the textbook) can wash 5 kg of clothes in an hour.
How much more clothes a washing machine will wash in 8 hours?

Exercise 147-2.
The railroad was used to deliver 640 heads of cattle to the meat factory, 8 heads per car.
How many rail cars were needed?
```
* A profession of "clothes washer" is a thing.
* Washing clothes is limited to women, as there is no masculine form of "prachka" laundress.
* Using a washing machine is likely preferable to hand washing.
* "Meat factory" concept is acceptable.
* Referring to mammals as "head of cattle" is acceptable.

Knowing about the biases helps to see things like sexism, racism, speciesism, and so on, but 
make no mistake: modern textbooks are not that different from old textbooks. The omission of
carnivorous examples from textbooks can also be seen as a bias. Arguably, not covering
hunting and trapping in SAS Survival Handbook could prove to be lethal for people relying on 
the book for actual survival in dire situations.

## When biases are not so obvious

SI want to highlight two things. First, in "Thinking Fast and Slow" Kahneman and Tversky show that
it's not that biases taint our pure logical brain, it's the opposite: our brain is a collection
of hacks and biases that sometimes can be suppressed by "slow" thinking. Second, the "Manual
for civilization" article from The Long Now (*eurgh*) mentions that almost any invention makes
sense only when it is contextualised by the civilization; knowing how to make buttons doesn't
help when your people never figured out why they'd want to use them.

Keeping this in mind, I'd go as far as to speculate that _all_ the books (and textbooks especially)
reflect the values of their creators in an intrinsically biased way, from how we treat animals and 
fellow humans to how we make use of what our Spaceship Earth has.

I am not an expert in morality, but I recognise that different societies have different, sometimes
vastly different, ideas about intrinsic values. There are cultures that value the lives of LGBT people or
women lower than the lives of straight cis men. There are cultures that value the lives of people similar to them
in some arguably random aspect more than the lives of people who lack this aspect, sometimes to the point where 
it is acceptable to strip those people of their humanity, property and lives. There are many cultures that
find it a virtue to pillage and plunder the land they live on, or at least the land their neighbours live on.
Oh wait, the last one is the overwhelming majority of civilizations, isn't it?

The variety in values is spectacular, and so is the abundance of the ways we can teach others about
the world we live in.

# When in Rome, do as the Romans do? 

I think this famous proverb in its Russian form is worth discussing in the context of the universal
textbook even more: "Don't go to someone else's monastery with your own rulebook".

Should I really ignore someone else's monastery if their rulebook encourages human eating?
Should I really try to understand their perspective and accommodate their culture by expanding
the textbook aimed at this monastery with the list of best dishes that can be made with human flesh?
Or should I try to explain that in the place I come from, eating not only humans but animals in general
is frowned upon, and the reasoning behind it, risking being "not relatable" enough?
Or should I at least try to avoid touching sensitive subjects of, let's say, domestic abuse, as they're
"generally unrelated" to the questions of literacy?

I don't really think I should brush off big issues like that. I think the inventions and knowledge that
humanity has been indebted to the millennia-long unfairness and injustice. I also think that
the wide access to the fruits of this knowledge and inventions, as well as improvements in justice and
fairness and overall humane treatment of people resulted in even greater improvements in our knowledge.
(Citation needed, though. It is my subjective feeling).

In the end, I just feel like avoiding imposing my morals onto a textbook is _wrong_. I wonder how is it
related to the fact that morals and values are intertwined...


