# 05. Technological bottlenecks

## Know-hows and specialisation
Anyone who has been fiddling with primitive technologies and even DIY can tell you:
in the real world, things are more complicated than we imagine them to be. 
We might know:
* pottery is just fired clay, or 
* plants grow if we stick seeds in the ground and water them, or 
* bread is a baked mixture of ground grains and water.

But we are missing important know-how:
* how to prevent clay from cracking during drying and firing, 
* how to make sure the plant actually grows and gives fruit, and 
* how to make flour and how much water to use.

The amount of know-hows for these is low, you don't need to spend 6 years on top of general education
to learn how to make pots, but it was and still is enough to create specialisation. But for these,
and many other technologies, knowing the general idea and tinkering around it for a few days or weeks
is generally enough to reach acceptable useable results. But there are some technologies and 
inventions that can't be achieved this way.

## Hard nuts to crack and technological bottlenecks
Among human technologies, some can be virtually impossible to achieve independently due to the scale 
and the amount of know-hows needed. Ironworking and glassmaking are two examples of such
technologies. We know that both were invented at least 4 thousand years ago, and we know that both
proved to be essential for our civilizations, but there are very few examples of these technologies
replicated without using special modern high-tech equipment. 

Take glass, for example. Most people know that glass is molten sand; some know that the glass we use
today is borax or soda-lime glass, and would want to add borax or soda-lime mix to the sand before trying
to melt it. But so did the Saxons freed from the Roman empire; they saw Romans making glass in Britain, and they
maybe even had some Roman furnaces left. Yet, they only could recycle glass and didn't know how
to make new one. Historians working on Saxon glassmaking noticed that Saxon furnaces, while theoretically
hot enough for glassmaking, were unstable; just a bad batch of wood could make melting the glass impossible.

*Side note: while in theory glass can be recycled forever, in practice heating the glass releases soda (or borax)
out of it, making the quality of the new glass lower than it was. Modern glass can be repurposed just once or twice
before it needs to be remade.*

Knowing how to make a Roman furnace isn't enough to run it, though. An experiment of building a small one in Hampshire 
in 2005 showed that simply building a furnace takes a few months; and then the furnace needs to be operated day and night, 
consuming some 9 tonnes of (presumably dried) firewood over three weeks. Let's suppose two people are enough
to operate the furnace in shifts; they still need some 430 kg of firewood a day. An experienced woodcutter with a sharp axe
can produce some 850 kg of logs per hour (source: Quora), but given that logs need to be split and transported to the 
furnace, you would likely need at least three people to operate the furnace continuously (and some 750 fully grown
trees a year, too - an acre of woodland). 

Even using modern knowledge and somewhat modern technologies, making glass and iron is not easy. "How to make everything" YouTuber was
not able to make any glassware using Roman furnace and glass recipe yet. And it took hundreds, probably thousands of dollars and
many hours of research. The same is said by L. Oliver II on his backyard metalworking: "It is not a mere ingot! 
This artifact is the culmination of over 5 years worth of research and development, and indeed a substantial amount of money".

Last, but not least: working with metals and glasses is dangerous. Without proper protective equipment, it is possible to
get severe burns, get exposed to toxic fumes, lose eyesight, or even die. Protective equipment is hard to get right and
often requires the very same technology you're working on (i.e. glasses for glassmaking).

## Why bottlenecks matter for The Knowledge Book

As I wrote earlier, The Knowledge Book should be useful for any human from any culture. Obviously, that means cultures that
did not develop their own ways of working with metal and glass, but it also means humans of modern Western cultures who
can buy workable high-quality steel ingots for *checks online*  £20 per kilogram, and steel rebars for under $600 a tonne.

Why would people from modern Western culture need to know how to make metal and glass using primitive technologies? Well,
there are at least two good reasons:

### 1. To better understand the economy of scale and the impossibility of a modern way of living without the incredible complexity of human systems.
Making a dozen or two glass bottles in a Roman furnace requires 430 kg of wood and two full-time artisans. With the current wood price of
£250 per sq. m. of pine wood (that's about 450 kg), and assuming minimum wage (£10.42/h), assuming no amortisation fee
for the furnace and soda-lime-silica mix to be free (and it's not), we still end up with something around £20 to £50 per empty bottle.
Would you throw away a "single-use" glass tare if you had to work 2-5 hours to afford to buy it?

Modern cheap glass is possible only because we have cheap energy to melt the glass, cheap composite materials to make modern furnaces,
cheap source materials and cheap ways of their transportation, cheap labour to operate heavy machinery, and an intricate web of social and
economic inequality across the world.

### 2. To be able to replicate and "unlock" further technological advances in the unfortunate case of global trade failures.
Much like Saxons after the exodus of Romans from Brittain, unfortunate societies (maybe towns or whole countries) might end up 
having existing steel and glass tools without the ability to create new ones. That naturally will lead to a decline in the number of available 
tools with time and the potential for significant worsening of the living standards as a result.

It is hard to speculate what exactly might cause societies as developed as the modern West to stop being able to produce steel or glass,
but it is quite plausible that ANY civilization can "lose" more advanced "bottleneck" technologies. Among those, I suspect, are
precise machinery (including steam and combustion engines), advanced and industrial chemistry, and semiconductors. 

